Short-Run aggregate supply 
- ===Aggregate Supply=== - the quantity supplied of all goods and services (real GDP) at different price levels, certeris paribus
- ===Short run Aggregate Supply (SRAS) Curve ===- a curve that shows the quantity supplied of all goods and services (real GDP )at different price levels, ceteris paribus.
Short-Run Aggregate Supply Curve
	the short-run aggregate supply curve (SRAS) is upward - sloping, specifying a direct relationship between the price level and the quantity supplied of real GDP

---
Why does the Aggregate Supply Curve Slope Upward?
	Two possible explanations:
	- Sticky wages
	- Worker misconceptions

Sticky Wages, the Real Wage Rate, and SRAS
- ===Wages are "locked in" for a few years due to labor contracts or perhaps because of social conventions or perceived notions of fairness===
- While firms pay nominal wages (less value) they often decide how many workers to hire based on real wages (adjusted for inflation)

Sticky Wages and the Real Wage Rate - Workers
- The Real wage = Nominal wage/Price level.
- Price level goes up real wages goes down, ceteris paribus
- Price level decrease real wages goes up, ceteris paribus
- More individuals are willing to work, and current workers are willing to work more at higher real wages than at lower real wages and vice versa.
Real wage Goes up -> Quantity supplied of labor Increases.
Real wag goes down -> Quantity of labor supplied Decrease.

Sticky Wages and the Real Wage rate - Firms
- ===Firms will employ more workers the cheaper it is to hire them.===
- Real wages goes up -> Quantity of labor demanded Decrease
- Real wages goes down -> Quantity of labor demanded Increases.
	Thus. if wages are sticky, an increase in the price level (which pushes real wages down) will result in a increase in output. This is what an upward-sloping SRAS curve represents. As the price level rises, the quantity supplied of goods and services rises. The opposite occurs if price levels fall

---
Worker Misconceptions
- If ==workers === ===misperceive=== ===real wages changes=== then a ==fall in the price level=== will bring about a ===decline in output===, cetreris paribus, which is illustrative of an ===upward-sloping SRAS curve===
- In response to (the misperceived) falling real wage, ===workers may reduce the quantity of labor they are willing to supply. ===With fewer workers (resources), ===firms will end up producing less.===

---
Changes in SRAS
	Shifts in the SRAS curve may be caused by changes in:
- Wage rates
- Prices of non-labor inputs
- Productivity
- Supply shocks
	- Adverse
	- Beneficial

===Changes in Wage Rates===
- The impact of a rise or fall in equilibrium wage rates can be understood in terms of the following equation: Profit per unit = Price per unit - Cost per unit
	- Higher wage rates means higher costs and a reduction in the number of units ( of a given good) that firms will want to produce.
	- Lower wage rates mean lower costs and, at constant prices, translate into higher profits and an increase in the number of units( of a given good) firms will decide to produce.

===Changes in the Price of Non-labor Inputs===
	Changs in the prices of non-labor inputs affect the SRAS curve in the same way as changes in wage rates do.
		An increase in the price of a non-labor input(e.g., oil, raw materials) Shifts the SRAS curve leftward; a decrease in their price shifts the SRAS curve rightward.

Changes in the Productivity
- ***Productivity*** is the output produced per unit of input employed over some period of time. Although various inputs can become more productive, let's consider the labor input
	- An ***increase*** in labor productivity means businesses will produce more output with the same amount of labor, causing the SRAS curve to shift rightward.
	- A ***decrease*** in labor productivity means businesses will produce less output with the same amount of labor, causing the SRAS curve to shift leftward.
	- A host of factors lead to increased labor productivity, including a more educated labor force, a larger stock of capital goods, and technological advancements
---
Supply Shocks
	Major natural or institutional changes that affect aggregate supply are referred to as supply shocks. Supply shocks are two varieties.
- Adverse supply shocks shifts the SRAS curve leftward.
- Beneficial supply shocks shift the SRAS curve rightward
	- Hurricane Milton causing a disrupt in the production of IV fluid for hospitals

Short-run Equilibrium
- At P1, the quantity supplied of Real GDP is greater than the quantity demanded. As a result, the price level falls and firms decrease output.
- At P2, the quantity demanded of Real GDP is greater than the quantity supplied. As a result, the price level rises and firms increase output.
- Short-run equilibrium occurs at point E, where the quantity demanded of Real GDP equals the (short-run) quantity supplied.

---
Natural Real GDP and Natural Unemployment
- The Real GDP that is produced at the natural unemployment rate
- The Real GDP that is produced when the economy is in long-run equilibrium.
	- Unemployment caused by frictional and structural factors in the economy

Long-Run aggregate Supply (LRAS)Curve
- The LRAS curve is a vertical line at the level of Natural Real GDP.
- It represents the output the economy produces when all economy wide adjustments have taken place and workers do not have any relevant misperceptions.

---
Equilibrium States of the Economy.
	During the time an economy moves from on equilibrium to another it is said to be in disequilibrium.

Short run Equilibrium
- The condition that exists in the economy when the quantity demanded of Real GDP equals the (short-run) quantity supplied of Real GDP.
- This condition is met where the aggregate demand curve intersects the short-run aggregate supply curve.

Long-run Equilibrium
- The condition that exists in the economy when wages and prices have adjusted to their (final) equilibrium levels and workers do not have any relevant misperceptions 
- Graphical, long run equilibrium occur at the intersection of the AD and LRAS curves.

Three States of an Economy
	An economy can be in short-run equilibrium, long-run equilibrium, or disequilibrium.
- When the economy is in neither short -run nor long-run equilibrium, it is said to be in disequilibrium
- Essentially, disequilibrium is the state of the economy as it moves from one short run equilibrium to another or from short-run equilibrium to long-run equilibrium.
- In disequilibrium, the quantity supplied an the quantity demanded of Real GDP are not equal.

[[ECON 2301 COURSE OVERVIEW]]