Gilded age of American history

Progressive movements in media
	wizard of oz
		The wizard in the story is an authoritarian leader, the wizard of oz story is an allegory for populist moment

Gilded Age
- coined by mark twain
- machine politics exemplified corrupt business man and industrialist and age of materialism
- Rise of corrupt political groups
- Mark Twains satire reveal the cost of doing business in Washington
- differences in social classes

Presidential election of 1876
- highly controversial period of economic downturn post civil war
- Democrats highlighted republican scandals and corruption
- Republicans placard highlights the parties role in preserving liberty and union. "bloody shirt campaign" remind electorate of civil war and democrat role in the war
- "great betrayal compromise" - perspective of African Americans and the fallout of reconstruction.
- questionable tactics and backroom deals
- Lack of consensus after the election, could have ended in another Civil War

How did mark Twains book "The Gilded Age" satirize the politics and society of the post civil war era?
	Highlighted the consumerism, businessman, and industrialist in the post civil war era, populist message,

---
The spoils system
	The practice of the president to practice widespread political patronage in the form of naming friends and supporters in various political posts. repaying favors with patronage was important to all presidents regardless of party affiliation.

Garfields assassination
- Southern unrest and turmoil post civil war
- Garfield assassinated
- Charles Guiteau wanted a position in Garfields administration, wanted political reform. Civil service act - anti patronage 
- Charles was a loyal republican
- Thought his act would unite the party

Stewards
	group that strongly supported the continuation of the current spoil system long supporting former president grant, no sympathy for early appeals for civil service reform

Half-Breeds
	half-republicans, name given as derogatory nickname from the stewards.
	advocated for some measure of civil service reform

Mugwumps
	A portion of the Republican party that broke away from the Stalwart versus halfbreed debate due to disgust with their candidates corruption.

---
Monetary Policies and the issue of Gold vs Silver
	while the topics of political corruption, the spoils system and the question of tariff rates were popular, none were more relevant to the working class americans and farmers than the issue of the nations monetary policy and the debate of gold vs silver
		There were many attempts to establish a bimetallic  standard all would have benefited famers but the government reminded committed to the gold standard.

Farmers Revolt in the Populist Era
	Overproduction of crops occurred in westward expansion, famers began to organize into different groups
		The groups were similar to labor unions after taking note of how industrial labor movement had unfolded in the last century
		farmers began to understand that a collective voice would create significant pressure among political leaders and produce substantive change
- Grange movement: Oliver Hudson Kellys' creation of the patrons of husbandry in the wake of the civil war, prominent roles for women. step to women's suffrage.

Farmers Alliance
	A national conglomeration of different regional famers alliance. advocated for a national agenda.

Populist party
	a political party formed in 1890 that sought to represent the rights of primarily farmers but eventually all workers in regional and federal elections. learned from their failure that their movement had merit for all workers plights.

---
discussion question
1. the main economic challenge faced by American farmers were tariffs as well as the issue of the gold vs silver standard and the lack of inflationary pressure.
2. 