Ludwig Van Beethoven
- Classical composer
- Romantic composer
revolutionizes music introducing romantic style. Inspired by ideas of French Revolution 1789(Liberty, Brotherhood and Equality), struggling with deafness, Beethoven and his music exemplify human perseverance and triumph over adversity

---
most important works are: 
- 9 Symphonies
- 5 Piano Concertos
- 1 Violin Concerto
- 32 Piano Sonatas
- 16 String Quartets
- 1 Opera
---
Two Important forms in Classical Compositions Beethoven Revolutionized
- Sonata
- Sonata Allegro
	- Exposition - introduces contrasting themes and harmonies
	- Development - Polarizes thematic contrast by reshaping, elaborating and varying the musical material
	- Recapitulation - restates the contrasting themes
- Pathetique - broke the rules of classical style
- 
---
Bio
- 1770 - Born in Bonn, Germany
	- Studies music with abusive father
- 1778 - Performs publicly as a pianist.
- 1789 - French Revolution (Liberty, Brotherhood and Equality) changes long lasting aristocratic system of power
- 1792 - Moves to Vienna, Austria to study with great classical composer Haydn
	- Gives Private piano lessons to members of aristocratic families
	- Establishes himself as a piano virtuoso through public concerts and competitions with other pianists
- 1800 - First public concert featuring Beethovens Composition in Vienna.
	- Hearing loss begins.
	- In addition to performing, teaching and publishing his music, composer receive aristocratic patronage and support.
	- "smashing success" patrons give him money for living food and rent
- 1802 - Despite suicidal thoughts, Beethoven continues writing his greatest masterpieces introducing romantic style of music.
	- Gains international recognition through commissions from London, St. Petersburg, and Paris
	- After 1810, is universally recognized as the greatest living composer
	- Slowly withdraws from the public because of his deafness.
	- starts drinking heavily and does not commit suicide
	- Starts composing romantic music due to his emotional state
	- Continues composing for 20 years
- Dies in Vienna.
- 20000 people attend his funeral
- Was always alone, Never married or had a family.
---




