Texas constitution
	The New Republic of Texas
- The delegates of Texas met in Washington-on-the-brazos in 1836 to sign a declaration of independence from Mexico and forge a constitution for the new republic
- The first constitution would outline the core principles of liberty, popular rule and limited government

	Key Terms
- ==Constitution==: A document that establishes principles, powers, and responsibilities of government
- ===Bill of Rights===: a formal declaration of rights of the citizens within government
- ===Social Contract===: an agreement in which the governed give up freedoms in return for government protection 

Why is the constitution important?
	 A constitution is the supreme law of the land, The US Federal constitution is relatively short. majority of modern constitutions are bloated and include many articles that deal with the government structure, rights, liberties, duties etc. 
		 Some constitutions include positive and negative rights an example of a positive right is freedom to have education or freedom to have healthcare
	In the US constitution, most rights are negative rights. a peculiarity of the United States. 
		Modern constitutions have many iterations and have updated radically to match modern circumstances, The US constitution by contrast garners a lot of criticism for being outdated, The counter argument is that the framers have set up the constitution to be very hard to change.

---

The Texas constitution
	The Texas constitution was made at the end of the 19th century and is therefore more advanced than the US constitution. Modern constitutions are more capable to reflect the modern circumstances.
What are the difference between the state of Texas and the Republic of Texas?
	The Republic of Texas constitution preamble invokes the language of the US constitution almost verbatim while the State constitution Invokes the blessing of god and omits language about forming and protecting of a sovereign territory. The Republic of Texas is secular while the state constitution preamble references religion.

---

Two Themes
- Early Anglo Texans valued rugged individualism and were not inclined to give up their freedoms to government rule lightly:
	- Individual rights
	- Separation of powers

Roots of Rebellion
- The spirit of Texas was forged in direct reaction ot tyranny from multiple governments and several overbearing rulers.
- in 1822, Augustin de Iturbide seized power from the democratically chosen Mexican Congress.
- In 1823, Iturbide was forced to abdicate.
- Following Iturbides departure, the Mexican Constitution of 1824 expanded settlement of the northern Mexico Territory.
- "Empresarios" were regional land distributors, serving as local recruiters and leaders of fixed areas of land and the people who settled there.
- Stephen F. Austin served as an empresario.

Key Terms
- ===Monarchy===: a government run by a single individual, often a king or queen, until death or abdication
- ===Republic===: a form of government in which people rule indirectly through elected representatives
- ===Sovereignty===: authority over a political entity, such as a province or state
- ===Separation of Powers===: a system that vests political, judicial, and policymaking authority across different branches of government

Mexican Constitution of 1824
- Empresarios (like Ausitin) would be in charge of the colonized territories.
- The mexican government promised to protect the liberty, property, and civil rights of all "foreigners" who would in turn profess the Roman Catholic faith.
- The constitution of 1824 established a federal republic for the nation as a whole

Texas constitution of 1827
- The constitution of the state of coahuila and tejas established a separation of power system for the state within the mexican nation
- the constitution included three branches of government, similar to the US constitution
- The mexican constitution of 1824 and the texas constitution of 1827 represent the high point of liberty granted to the mexican colonists.

Separation 
- in 1835 Mexican president santa anaa took measures to centralize his own power
- he sent his vice president into exile, disbanded congress, and dissolved the state legislatures.
- Santa Anna also dismissed the empresaros, including Sephen F Austin

---
Texas Constitution of 1876
- Born from the Reconstruction Era resentment of the preceived overaching power of Governor Davis, the constitution of 1876 is still in use in Texas
- It generally favored a return to limited government and frugality.
- Opponents took issue with the weakening role of the state in immigration and education.
	Four key principles 
	- Popular sovereignty
	- Limited state government through local control
	- Separation of powers
	- Personal rights and liberties
- In rresponse to overreaching executive power under governor EJ davis the powers of the governorship were reduced and the delegates created plural executive
	- ===Plural Executive===: diffusion of authority and power throughout several entities in the executive branch.
	- 
