==Lecture Notes==

Texas Legislature.
- Texas distrust of executive branch - remnant of Texas origins
- policy is shaped through strong legislative branch
- in essence legislation is law-making
- legislative work however, is not just lawmaking. A large part of legislation is procedure and other rules that are formally created not just at a constitutional level but at smaller and smaller local levels.
- citizens desire that lawmakers are created by trusted, experienced individual, there is an expectation of professionalism.
- in Texas lawmaking is carried out unprofessionally, lawmakers are either unpaid or paid unconventionally 
- To what extent is this lack of professionalism a good thing? to what extent is it a bad thing? Which one is better for our government?
- Explain the concept of lawmaking? in a detailed complex matter define it.

	car purchase analogy for lawmaking - when you intent to purchase a vehicle, before you purchase it, you perform a good deal of planning. either you perform cost-budget analysis or you research about a particular car. either way, there is a vast amount of preliminary actions you take before implementation of those plans.
In the same way, law making is not only the creation of laws but the final outcome of a vast preliminary stage. the implementation of laws is a function of the executive branch while planning is carried out by the legislative branch.
	in the sports world, in a football game the players are implementing the plan while the coaches are the ones who make the plan. it can be said that the players are the executive branch while the coaches are the legislative branch, furthermore, the referees in the football game carry out the function of the judicial branch

Why is legislation, or understanding legislation important? many political commentators and pendants  in the media talk about easy to grasp concepts such as elections and other sensational aspects of the government. The policy aspect of the government is abstract to many people and gets low approval ratings when brought up in the media. it is important to understand lawmaking because it is impactful to the structure of your daily life and an often overlooked aspect when considering what representative to vote for.

Functions of Legislative Bodies
- Lawmaking
- Reapportionment / redistricting
- Constitution / amendment
- Casework
- Education / information
- Oversight
- Investigations

Lawmaking
	In essence the first feature of lawmaking is creating the rules of the game, meaning what is the right and wrong type of behavior or procedure. These formal rules direct us in the 'right' direction. Legislative work is also about creating the 'plan of action' to bring about the rules. The goal of the government is to deliver collective goods to society, the legislative branch creates the course of action to help process. 

Structure of the Legislature
- Bicameral
	- House of Representatives - 150
	- Senate - 31
	- Speaker of the House elected by membership
	- Lt. Governor elected statewide - equivalent to the president in the federal election

Electing Legislators
- Selection in November general election
	- take office in January
- Single member districts
- 2 year terms for representatives
- 4 year staggered terms for senators
- Vacancies filled by special elections

Sessions
- Biennial regular sessions
	- 2nd Tuesday in January, odd-numbered years
	- 140 dyas
- Special sessions
	- Governor sets topics
	- 30 days
	- cost - $1.7 million

Legislative Districts
- Redistricting after census
- Districts (continue...)




